
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# **Assessing the impact of salmon farming on coastal cod using liver fatty acid composition**

Authors: Pablo Sanchez-Jerez<sup>1\*</sup>, Javier Atalah<sup>1</sup>,
Ingeborg Mathisen Sætra<sup>2</sup>, Thomas Bøhn<sup>2</sup>,
Bjorn-Steinar Saether<sup>3</sup>, Torild Johansen<sup>2</sup>, Nigel
Keeley<sup>2</sup>, Pål Arne Bjørn<sup>2</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Department of Marine Science and Applied Biology, University
of Alicante. PO Box 99. 03008. Alicante, Spain.

<sup>2</sup>Institute of Marine Research, PO Box 6606, 9296. Tromsø,
Norway.

<sup>3</sup>The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.

\*corresponding author email: <p.sanchez@ua.es>

**ABSTRACT**

Coastal cod populations have experienced a sharp decline due to
overfishing, but other stressors, such as nursery habitat destruction,
climate change and salmon farming, have also contributed to the
unsuccessful recovery plan for coastal cod. Salmon farming can adversely
affect wild fish populations by altering their behaviour and
distribution, which results in altered feeding habits, growth,
physiology, and body composition. We collected liver tissue samples from
75 wild coastal cod near a salmon farm and three control areas 3 km
away. By comparing the composition of liver tissue in relation to
season, fish condition, sex, maturity, and age, we demonstrate that the
fatty acid composition of cod living near salmon farm cages differed
from those caught farther away. Specifically, the impacted fish had
higher concentrations of linoleic and linolenic acids, which serve as
biomarkers for waste feed consumption. Control fish tended to have
higher concentrations of essential fatty acids such as docosahexaenoic
acid, eicosapentaenoic acid, and arachidonic acid. Furthermore, we
observed a significant difference in fatty acid concentration and
composition variability between coastal cod caught near a salmon farm
and control fish, with impacted fish exhibiting a higher variability.
Deficiencies or imbalances in essential fatty acid availability can
significantly impact critical processes such as nutrition, the immune
system, and reproduction, which may harm individual fish at different
life stages and ultimately threaten the conservation of wild fish
populations. The study highlights the impact of salmon farming on the
diet of wild coastal cod by examining fatty acid profiles. It suggests
that changes in the fatty acid profiles of cod livers could be used to
determine the influence of fish farming on local wild fish populations.
Further studies are needed to investigate causal mechanisms and
establish threshold values at which alterations in fatty acid within the
food could harm the fish.

**keywords**: *Biomarkers of terrestrial feed sources*, *Coastal cod*
Gadus morhua, *fatty acid composition*, *multiple stressors*,
*physiological alterations*, *salmon aquaculture* and *wild fish
interactions*, *waste feed*.
